Property Modeling
=================

This tutorial introduces property modeling in Petres.
Grid properties are defined per cell and
they represent scalar quantities such as porosity, permeability, saturation,
net-to-gross, or any other spatially distributed field.

In this chapter, you will learn how to:

- Create new grid properties
- Fill them with constant or stochastic values
- Derive one property from another
- Populate values from existing NumPy arrays
- Interpolate property values from wells
- Assign properties zone by zone
- Inspect statistics and summaries
- Visualize the resulting distributions

.. note::

   This tutorial assumes that you are already familiar with
   :doc:`horizon-modeling`,
   :doc:`zone-modeling`,
   :doc:`pillar-gridding`,
   and grid creation workflows such as
   :doc:`grid-modeling-from-horizons-and-zones`.



Creating a Property
-------------------

The first step in property modeling is to create a property on the grid:

.. code-block:: python

   from petres.grids import CornerPointGrid

    grid = CornerPointGrid.from_regular(
        xlim=(0, 1000),
        ylim=(0, 1000),
        zlim=(0, 100),
        ni=20,
        nj=20,
        nk=3,
    )

    porosity = grid.properties.create(
        name="poro",
        eclipse_keyword="PORO",
        description="Porosity",
    )

The ``name`` defines the internal Petres identifier used to access the property.
The object returned during creation is the same property and can be accessed later from the grid:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity = grid.properties["poro"]

The optional ``eclipse_keyword`` is useful when exporting the property to
Eclipse ``.GRDECL`` format. The ``description`` is also optional and can be used
to provide a more readable explanation of the property, if needed.

Constant Property Assignment
----------------------------

A property can be filled with a constant value across the whole grid using
:meth:`fill` method:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.fill(0.2)

This assigns a porosity value of 0.2 to every cell.

Visualizing a Property
----------------------

A property can be visualized directly:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.show()

By default, inactive cells are hidden. To include them:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.show(show_inactive=True)

The colormap can be customized:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.show(cmap="viridis")

Any valid Matplotlib colormap name can be used, such as ``"viridis"``,
``"plasma"``, ``"coolwarm"``, or ``"inferno"``. 
A title is automatically generated by default (e.g., ``"Property: poro"``).
You can override the title:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.show(title="Porosity Distribution")

Or disable it entirely:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.show(title=None)

    

Deriving a Property from Other Sources
--------------------------------------

A new property can be computed from one or more existing sources using
:meth:`apply`. For example, permeability may be derived from porosity:

.. code-block:: python

    permeability = grid.properties.create(
        name="perm",
        eclipse_keyword="PERM",
        description="Permeability",
    )
    permeability.apply(lambda poro: 100 * poro**3, source=porosity)
    permeability.show()

The ``source`` argument may refer to:

- An existing property object
- The name of an existing property
- One of the predefined :ref:`grid-derived attributes <grid-attributes>`

You can also refer to a property using its name:

.. code-block:: python
    
    permeability.apply(lambda poro: 100 * poro**3, source="poro")



Using a Named Function
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Instead of a lambda expression, a regular Python function can be used.

.. code-block:: python

    def calc_perm(poro):
        return 100 * poro**3

   permeability.apply(calc_perm, source="poro")

Using a named function is often preferable when the transformation becomes
more complex or needs to be reused.



.. _grid-attributes:

Built-In Grid Attributes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following built-in attribute names can be used as data sources in
:meth:`GridProperty.apply`.
These attributes are computed directly from the grid geometry and do not
require explicit property creation.

- ``"x"``: X-coordinate of cell centers  
- ``"y"``: Y-coordinate of cell centers  
- ``"depth"`` (or ``"z"``): Cell-center depth (positive downward)  
- ``"top"``: Depth of the top face of each cell  
- ``"bottom"``: Depth of the bottom face of each cell  
- ``"thickness"``: Cell thickness (``bottom - top``)  
- ``"active"``: Activity indicator (1 for active cells, 0 for inactive)  

These attributes can be used directly as input sources. For example,
permeability can be defined as a function of depth:

.. code-block:: python

    permeability.apply(
        lambda depth: depth / 1000,
        source="depth",
    )

.. important::

   These names are **reserved** and cannot be used when defining new
   properties. Attempting to create a property with one of these names
   will raise an error.

Using Multiple Sources
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :meth:`apply` method can combine multiple sources, including both
properties and grid-derived attributes.

.. code-block:: python

    permeability.apply(
        lambda poro, depth: 100*poro*thickness + depth,
        source=(porosity, "depth", 'thickness'),
    )



Property Statistics
-------------------

Petres provides convenient access to common summary statistics.

.. code-block:: python

    print("Min Value:", permeability.min)
    print("Max Value:", permeability.max)
    print("Mean Value:", permeability.mean)
    print("Median Value:", permeability.median)
    print("Standard Deviation:", permeability.std)

You can also print a full summary:

.. code-block:: python

    print(permeability.summary())

This is useful for quickly checking whether the modeled values fall within
reasonable physical limits.

Filling with a Uniform Distribution
-----------------------------------

For stochastic modeling, a property can be filled from a uniform distribution.

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.fill_uniform(low=0.24, high=0.30)

This generates values uniformly distributed between the specified lower and upper bounds.

Filling with a Normal Distribution
----------------------------------

A normal distribution can be used when a property is expected to vary around
a representative mean value.

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.fill_normal(mean=0.24, std=0.03)

Minimum and maximum clipping bounds may optionally be supplied:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.fill_normal(mean=0.24, std=0.03, min=0.20, max=0.30)

To ensure reproducibility, a random seed may also be set:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.fill_normal(mean=0.24, std=0.03, seed=42)

Filling with a Log-Normal Distribution
--------------------------------------

A log-normal distribution is often more suitable for positively skewed properties,
especially for quantities such as permeability.

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.fill_lognormal(mean=0.24, std=0.03)

As with normal filling, optional bounds may be provided:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.fill_lognormal(mean=0.24, std=0.03, min=0.20, max=0.30)

A seed can also be specified for reproducibility:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.fill_lognormal(mean=0.24, std=0.03, seed=42)

Populating a Property from a NumPy Array
----------------------------------------

If you already have a precomputed 3D array of values, it can be assigned directly
to the property.

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np

    array = np.full(grid.shape, 0.24)
    porosity.from_array(array)

This is especially useful when the property values come from an external workflow,
a simulator output, or a separate numerical calculation.

Zone-Based Property Assignment
------------------------------

If the grid contains zone information, property values can be modeled separately
for each zone. This is particularly useful when different formations require different property
ranges or modeling assumptions. 
The example below assumes that the zones have already been defined, as shown in
earlier tutorials (see :doc:`zone-modeling`, :doc:`grid-modeling-from-horizons-and-zones`).

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.fill(0.20, zone="Caprock")
    porosity.fill(0.50, zone="Base")

The same zone-based idea can be used with other population methods as well`. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.fill_normal(mean=0.08, std=0.01, zone="Caprock")
    porosity.fill_normal(mean=0.24, std=0.03, zone="Base")

This allows each zone to be modeled independently.













Interpolating Property Values from Wells
----------------------------------------

Property values can also be assigned by interpolating measurements taken at well locations. 
This is useful when property data are available only at sparse sample 
points and need to be distributed throughout the grid.

Defining Property Samples on Wells
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are two supported ways to assign property measurements to wells.

1. Depth-Dependent Samples
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use this approach when the property varies along the well trajectory.
Each sample is associated with a specific depth:

.. code-block:: python

    well1.add_sample(name="porosity", value=100, depth=10)
    well1.add_sample(name="porosity", value=120, depth=20)

    well2.add_sample(name="porosity", value=50, depth=15)
    well2.add_sample(name="porosity", value=70, depth=25)

Each `(property, depth)` pair must be unique per well.  
In other words, you cannot assign multiple values to the 
same property at the same depth within a well.

This mode enables **3D** interpolation, where the property varies in both
horizontal and vertical directions.


2. Single Sample per Well
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use this approach when only one representative value per well is available:

.. code-block:: python

    well1.add_sample(name="porosity", value=100)
    well2.add_sample(name="porosity", value=50)

In this case, the value represents the entire well, and no depth variation
is assumed. Interpolation will therefore be independent of depth.

.. important::

    - You cannot mix sampling modes for the same property on a single well — choose either depth-dependent or single sample method.

    - Mixing both modes for the same property is not allowed.

    - When performing interpolation, all wells must use the same sampling mode for the selected property.

Interpolating to the Grid
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once samples are defined, you can interpolate them onto the grid:

.. code-block:: python

    from petres.interpolators import IDWInterpolator

    porosity.from_wells(
        wells=[well1, well2],
        interpolator=IDWInterpolator(),
    )

If the input samples are depth-dependent, interpolation is performed in **3D**. For single value samples, 
interpolation is performed in **2D** and applied uniformly along the vertical axis.  

.. note::

    In this example, Inverse Distance Weighting 
    (:class:`~petres.interpolators.InverseDistanceWeightingInterpolator`) is used. 
    For more details and additional interpolation options, see :doc:`/tutorials/interpolators`. 



Filling Remaining Missing Values
--------------------------------

In some workflows, such as zone-based modeling or interpolation, certain cells may remain unassigned and contain ``NaN`` values.
These values can be replaced using :meth:`fill_nan`:

.. code-block:: python

    porosity.fill_nan(0.0)

This is particularly useful for handling inactive cells and ensuring that all grid cells have valid values before further processing or export.




Complete Example
----------------

The following example combines several of the ideas introduced above.

.. code-block:: python

   from petres.grids import CornerPointGrid
   import numpy as np

   grid = CornerPointGrid.from_regular(
       xlim=(0, 1000),
       ylim=(0, 1000),
       zlim=(0, 100),
       ni=20,
       nj=20,
       nk=3,
   )

   porosity = grid.properties.create(
       name="poro",
       eclipse_keyword="PORO",
       description="Porosity",
   )

   porosity.fill_normal(mean=0.24, std=0.03, min=0.20, max=0.30, seed=42)

   permeability = grid.properties.create(
       name="perm",
       eclipse_keyword="PERM",
       description="Permeability",
   )

   permeability.apply(
       lambda poro, z: 100 * poro**3 + z,
       source=(porosity, "z"),
   )

   print(porosity.summary())
   print(permeability.summary())

   porosity.show(cmap="viridis")
   permeability.show(cmap="plasma")

Where to Go Next
----------------

Now that you know how to define and populate cell properties, the next step is
usually to export the grid and its associated properties for simulation use 
(see :doc:`exporting-grid`)


